Credits
=======

We would like to express our special thanks to numerous people who have
substantially contributed to the development of various aspects of this
work, in alphabetical order:

Frans Alkemade, Gert-Jan Bartelds, Ehud Behar, Alex Blustin, Elisa
Costantini, Max Duysens, Jacobo Ebrero, Irma Eggenkamp, Andrzej Fludra,
Yan Grange, Ed Gronenschild, Liyi Gu, Theo Gunsing, Jörgen Hansen,
Wouter Hartmann, Kurt van der Heyden. Fred Jansen, Jelle Kaastra, Jim
Lemen, Duane Liedahl, Junjie Mao, Pasquale Mazzotta, Missagh Mehdipour,
Rolf Mewe, Hans Nieuwenhuijzen, Bert van den Oord, Ken Phillips, Ciro
Pinto, Ton Raassen, Remco van der Rijst, Makoto Sawada, Hans Schrijver,
Karel Schrijver, Tiemen Schut, Janusz Sylwester, Rob Smeets, Katrien
Steenbrugge, Jeroen Stil, Igone Urdampilleta, Dima Verner, Jacco Vink,
Frank van der Wolf, Piotr Zycki.

During the years the many people have contributed as follows:

Software
--------

Most software is written by Kaastra. Nieuwenhuijzen contributed to the
software design.

De Plaa maintains the software on different platforms.

The philosophy of the fitting procedure is based on the experiences
obtained with the fitting of EXOSAT data, especially on the software
package ERRFIT designed by Jansen and Kaastra.

Tiemen Schut has initiated the parallelisation of important parts of the
code.

This product includes software developed by the University of Chicago,
as Operator of Argonne National Laboratory. In particular code from the
MINPACK package.

Plasma model
------------

The line and continuum emission routines were written by Kaastra, based
on previous routines by Mewe, Gronenschild, van den Oord, and Lemen
(1981-1986).

The original line and continuum emission data are based on the work by
Mewe and Kaastra.

Raassen has calculated and compiled a large amount of atomic data for
the models.

Nieuwenhuijzen, Hansen, Duysens and Van der Rijst contributed to the
extension of the atomic database.

Phillips contributed to improvements of the wavelengths of strong lines.

Liedahl contributed to the Fe-L calculations.

The photo-ionization cross-sections have been provided by Verner. Behar
and Raassen contributed to the atomic data for the absorption models.

Missagh Mehdipour helped with the pion model.

Mazzotta and Urdampilleta worked on the ionization balance.

Mao incorporated new radiative recombination data.

Gu developed the charge exchange models.

Missagh Mehdipour and Daniele Rogantini developed the tpho model.

The non-equilibrium ionization balance routine was developed by Jansen,
based on earlier work by Hans Schrijver (1974) and Gronenschild (1981).
It was extended and updated together with Sawada (2014).

SPEX models
-----------

The SNR models are based on the work by Kaastra and Jansen (1992), with
further extensions and testing by Stil, Eggenkamp and Vink.

Costantini and Pinto contributed to the dust models.

Lemen, Smeets, and Alkemade developed an earlier version (1986-1990) of
a spectrum synthesis program.

The original DEM modelling was based on the work by Sylwester and Fludra
(1980), while the current DEM regularisation algorithm has been designed
by Karel Schrijver and Alkemade. Bartelds contributed to the testing of
these models.

Piotr Zycki provided us the *refl* model code.

Documentation
-------------

The first version (1.0) of the documentation has been prepared – with
starting help by Gunsing – by van der Wolf and Nieuwenhuijzen. The
second version was set-up by Kaastra with contributions from
Steenbrugge, van der Heyden and Blustin. The later versions were managed
by de Plaa.

The cookbook contains contributions from De Plaa, Ebrero, Grange, Pinto,
Kaastra, Steenbrugge, Gu, and Mehdipour.
